Section 5.2: Domain and Range. These are two
of the most important ideas in functions.
The domain is the set of all possible x values you can input.
The range is the set of all possible y values the function outputs.
The domain is shown along the x-axis in green.
For this parabola. x can be any real number.
The range is shown along the y-axis in yellow. This parabola has a maximum at
y equals 4. so the range is y less than or equal to 4.
Here are three examples. A straight line has domain and range of
all real numbers. A parabola opening down has all reals for domain.
but the range is limited by the vertex. A square root curve
starts at a point. so both domain and range are restricted.
Rule 1: You cannot take the square root of a negative number.
For root of x minus 2. we need x minus 2 to
be at least zero. so x must be at least 2.
Rule 2: You cannot divide by zero. For 2 over x. x cannot equal zero.
Rule 3: You cannot take the natural log of zero or a
negative number. For ln of x plus 3. we need x plus
3 to be positive. so x must be greater than negative 3.
What if a function has more than one restriction? Consider h of
x equals 5 over the square root of x minus 1.
First. the denominator cannot be zero. so x cannot be
1. Second. the expression under the square root must be
non-negative. so x must be at least 1.
Combining both restrictions: x must be strictly greater than 1.
IB exam tip: if a function has no fractions. no
square roots. and no logarithms. then the domain is all
real numbers. Polynomials always have domain of all reals.